[BACKGROUND MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH: Our
beloved Andrew Harvey
is in a revolutionary mode.
Religious scholar, Matthew Fox,
and other religious leaders
are joining with
Andrew in resurrecting
a new form of Christianity based
in the mystical love expressed
by Christ.
They're all deeply dismayed
at the ravaging effects
of Christian-driven
patriarchy on parishioners
around the planet.
There's another spin.
The Muslim mystic, Rumi, also
honored the mystical teachings
of Jesus, which has the
potential of creating
a bridge between the two worlds.
Andrew is with us today to
share the love once again.
And it's so delightful
to have you back.
Our whole building's buzzing.
"Andrew's back.
Andrew's back."
>>ANDREW HARVEY:
Thank you, darling.
Thank you so much.
Lovely to be with you.
>>REGINA: You leave
a trail, a mist,
of this very
elevated kind of love
in your wake everywhere you go.
Even at diners.
>>HARVEY: Thank you, sweetheart.
What are we here to
do except exude love?
>>REGINA: Exactly.
And you are the maestro.
And I wanted to start
right in on, off camera,
we were talking about
an event recently
in Oakland, California.
>>HARVEY: Yes.
>>REGINA: That you were a part
of, along with Matthew Fox.
And this, to me, is
very encouraging.
And you are attempting to
begin a true revolution
in Christianity.
Please start sharing.
Just go for it.
>>HARVEY: Well about seven
months ago, I rang Matt.
And Matthew Fox is one of my
dearest friends and somebody
who I have infinite
admiration for.
I said, Matt, we cannot
let the Christian church
and the Christian tradition be
interpreted by these morons,
and these sadists, and these
patriarchal fascists anymore.
We have got to really stand by
our authentic vision of Jesus
as a great revolutionary
of the heart
and a revolutionary of justice.
And why don't we start something
called the Christ Path Seminar?
And I called it the
Christ Path Seminar
because there was this great
movement called the Jesus
Seminar which made available
the historical Jesus in the way
that we've never
experienced him before.
But we wanted to
go the next level,
to make available to everybody
the authentic, mystical
teachings of Christ
that are in service
of a major revolution of
all institutions, all arts,
all sciences.
Matthew has a slightly less
exuberant temperament than I.
He thought for a moment,
and he said, well,
that will throw the
leopard among the pigeons.
Yes, was his answer.
So last weekend, actually
a couple of weekends
ago in Oakland, we began
the Christ Path Seminar.
And anybody who's
interested can go
to the christpathseminar.org.
We offered it as a gift
economy, so people paid only $50
either to listen to it in
live streaming or to attend.
Which we felt was
terribly important.
How can we talk about Jesus
and charge excessively for it?
So that was a very
important part of it.
And we really launched
the revolution.
It's been launched.
Because what both
of us said is, look,
the whole revelation has
been betrayed by making Jesus
into an inaccessible son
of God, a unique being.
This was not his intention, not
his mission, not his message.
Jesus never claimed to
be a unique son of God.
What he claimed was an
amazing relationship with God.
And he offered that relationship
to all other beings.
He enacted it.
And he showed what it
would look like to be
in that relationship.
And again, and again, and again,
he said, don't call me good.
Only God is good.
You can do things
that I can't do,
if only you'll establish
this relationship.
And in recent years,
in the last century,
we discovered the Gospel
of Thomas in 1945.
And the Gospel of
Thomas has, I believe,
Jesus' real, yogic
instruction to the world.
And fundamentally, what he's
saying in the Gospel of Thomas
is three things.
First, you are as
divine as I am.
You are born with
divine consciousness.
The whole point of
being on the Earth
is to realize that
and live your life
in the pursuit of
justice and compassion.
From the profoundest peace
and the wildest, wildest love.
The second thing he's saying
is that the kingdom, what
he calls the kingdom, this state
of joyful inter-penetrating,
inter-related love with
all things is already here.
It's on the Earth.
It's not in some otherwhere.
It's here.
And the whole point of waking
up to your divine consciousness
is that you wake up to this
radiance of divine presence
in the universe, in other
beings, and in yourself.
And in the works of
justice and compassion
that flow from that knowledge.
And the third thing
that Jesus is saying
is love doesn't
mean a hill of beans
until you put it
into radical action.
Jesus' vision of
enlightenment is
very different from the
vision of enlightenment
the we inherit from the
glorious traditions of Hinduism
and Buddhism.
And I love those
traditions, and honor them,
and I, of course,
was born in India.
And I co-wrote "The Tibetan
Book of Living and Dying."
So I'm not knocking
Hinduism Buddhism at all.
But what Jesus
brought in, uniquely,
was a vision of enlightenment,
the highest state
being one of being a
servant of others--
a truly dedicated, passionate,
compassionate servant of others
and in the name
of God as justice.
You know, one of the
things that's very damaging
about our new age, apart
from its terminal narcissism
and its incredibly
boring spirituality,
is its lack of understanding
that one of the holiest
names of God is justice.
People talk up a blue
streak about divine love,
divine love, divine love.
But they do not
accept or even begin
to imagine the real challenge
that the real Jesus is saying,
to every human being,
not just Christians,
but Buddhists and
all human beings.
Saying, you say you love God.
You say you are awake.
What are you doing?
What are you doing
with your life
to bring about the establishment
of the laws of compassion
and justice that belong to the
kingdom that is already here
in the divine presence
and waiting for you
to step up to your
mission to enact it
with courage in the
heart of the world?
So these three grenades
we tossed happily
into the decaying
body of Christianity.
>>REGINA: How did
the crowd respond?
I mean, people must
have been ecstatic.
>>HARVEY: Oh, I cannot tell you.
People were ecstatic
because there
are three kinds of Christians
at the moment, I think.
The first kind are those
who have bought the Kool-Aid
and really don't want
to be shoved aside
at all in their theology.
Because they've
decided who he is.
They've bought the
version of who he is.
And they're often
very nice people.
It's not that
they're bad people.
Some of the most
wonderful people I know
are fundamentalists, actually.
They have passionate
love of Jesus.
And they've very
kind and generous
in their personal lives.
It's just that they also believe
that the Dalai Lama is going
to burn in hell and
that homosexuals
will be burning with him.
And women who don't
obey their husbands
will also be crisping alongside.
So it's a little sad,
that particular vision
of Jesus' universal love.
The second kind of Christians
are the incredibly wounded
who have stayed in the
churches, although very
disabused of a great deal
of the church's teachings.
There are many
Catholics like this
who know perfectly well that
the Vatican has been covering up
pedophilia scandals, the
Vatican has been investing
in horrifying
things, the Vatican
is run by the boy's club.
The Vatican is
not releasing some
of the most powerful
teachings of Jesus.
They know all this, but it's
too scary for them to get out.
And they're like wounded members
of a dysfunctional family.
But the third kind
of Christian is
someone who has been so
wounded and so disabused
that they're truly
hungry for a new vision.
>>REGINA: That would be
almost in the born again
category of a lot of people
who've come to it later
in life, after
suffering a great deal
and not having
found other answers.
>>HARVEY: Well I
think also that they
are people who will not give
up their love affair with Jesus
but have understood that
none of the churches
represent the Jesus that
they are in love with.
And I'm in that category
because I was born a Protestant.
I was born in India.
From a very early
age, I realized
there was just one god
and many parts to the god.
But I never, ever, in all
of the different traditions
I've plunged into-- I've
been initiated in Sufism,
and in Buddhism, and in Hinduism
and learned a huge amount
from all of those
wonderful traditions.
But I never, ever lost
my passion for Him.
Because there's something about
Jesus, as a divine human being,
that shatters your heart open.
It's the bravest, wildest, most
courageous, most in your face,
most challenging living
out of the divine
that I think any
teacher's ever done.
And I think when
you really stare
into the face of the real Jesus,
into both the joy of that face
and the heartbreak
of that face, it
sears you at a profound level.
And you never forget
that glorious wound.
And those are the
Christians-- I hope
we can reach all those
three types of Christians,
because it would be such a
wonderful thing if we could
take back the golden shadow
that we've flung onto him
and claim our own divinity.
And resurrect the
mystical practices
that will help us do that.
>>REGINA: Yes.
I felt very
similarly as a child.
I was raised as a
Christian, a rather dour--
>>HARVEY: What
kind of Christian?
V Missouri Synod Lutheran.
>>HARVEY: Oh, my God,
that's very dour.
>>REGINA: As dour as it gets.
As dry as it gets.
And very dogmatic,
as a matter of fact.
>>HARVEY: Only faith saves you.
No works do.
Yes.
Oh, Lord, yes.
>>REGINA: Like I said, it's like
Catholicism without the fun.
>>HARVEY: Yes.
If you're going to
have a corrupt church,
have the drag queens, have the
incense, have the whole thing.
Don't go for drab.
>>REGINA: Something that
has a lot of juicy stuff.
Oh, yeah.
This was as drab as it gets.
But the dogma of it was such
that, even by the age of five,
when it was explained
to me-- I remember
asking my mother at
that time, but Mom,
what happens to a baby in
China that never had a chance
to learn about
Jesus, and then dies?
>>HARVEY: Oh, this
is such craziness.
>>REGINA: And she said,
well, no one said it's fair.
>>HARVEY: No one says it's fair?
I love that.
>>REGINA: No one says it's fair.
And that became a real
disconnect in my psyche.
>>HARVEY: Well, it's
rubbish, isn't it?
>>REGINA: It is.
Because there's
something else imbued
in any religion
of a larger nature
that you're absorbing
almost on a cellular level.
And then to have your mind
confused to that degree
creates, usually, a
falling away of some type.
>>HARVEY: Well it creates
a kind of schizophrenia,
let's face it.
Look, Jesus didn't come
to form a religion.
We've had enough religions.
He wasn't into the
business of being adored.
He came to show a
revolutionary path that
could lead you to be an
instrument of love and justice
in action, which is
much, much greater
than finding a religion.
Many lunatics have
founded a religion.
Very few have given
the path to humanity
of evolutionary transfiguration,
which is what he did.
Can you really
believe that a being
who went through what
he went through out
of sheer, wild
love for humanity,
would not embrace everyone?
Every broken, dispossessed,
desolate, heartbroken,
shattered person?
After all, he showed
that in his life, my God.
He hung out with
thieves and prostitutes.
He wasn't into the holy rollers.
And one of my favorite things,
one of my favorite stories,
is how he announced his
messiah-ship, his mission,
his divine purpose by the
well of Jacob to a woman
who had been divorced five
times, was a Sumerian.
So doubly outcast,
doubly rejected.
And, of course, a woman.
So not to some
guy in a robe, but
to a woman who was
considered disgusting,
he announced the great
secret of why he'd come.
So he's saying, through all
of these different ways,
I love everyone.
Everyone is welcome
to the feast.
It doesn't matter whether you
are gay, or straight, or black,
or white, or
Buddhist, or Hindu--
>>REGINA: Divorced five times.
>>HARVEY: --or a lesbian
go-go dancer in Caracas.
You are my brother
and my sister.
And I came to show you
that you're divine.
And you can become divine
if you surrender your love
to God and your life to God.
>>REGINA: And this had to
have an innate understanding.
And now this is a little going
more toward the science of it,
but an innate understanding
of the multi-dimensionality
of what it is to be human,
which we still don't truly
understand to this day.
Only maybe a handful
of people on the planet
know what it is to truly merge
with their other part that
is of a non-physical
and permanent nature.
And so he obviously understood
these deep principles
and was simply
trying to help people
remember that aspect of self.
>>HARVEY: Well, everyone
is the divine in drag.
And everyone is the divine
enacting a certain role, which
is crucial for the
future of the planet.
Everyone needs to turn
up as their fullest,
divine human self in order
for the plan to be successful.
It's like a piece of music.
Every note in a Mozart symphony
is absolutely essential.
And without that
note being sounded,
the symphony falls apart.
So the whole purpose of life is
to realize that you are divine.
And you're also human.
You're also the divine
appearing in this material body
with a mission of justice.
>>REGINA: We're an
unusual species.
We're a very unusual
species in that respect.
>>HARVEY: Yes.
And that's why we're
so screwed up also,
because it's very
difficult to be
these two things in the same.
>>REGINA: The
duality is really--
I don't know that the universe
has duality like this anywhere
else.
This is really incredible.
>>HARVEY: Well it's
not really duality.
It is because God is both
formless and appearing in form.
It's actually non-dual
because, as the Buddha said,
form is emptiness and
emptiness is form.
>>REGINA: That is true.
It's showing it's polarities
of one and the same.
>>HARVEY: Exactly.
It's polarities.
Because God is the opposition,
the marriage of opposites.
And what we are is that
same marriage of opposites,
both transcendent and imminent.
Both spirit and matter.
And they fuse in
a mystery which is
the source of our true identity.
>>REGINA: And yet,
we're taught things
such as what I was
taught in Sunday school.
And the way I was raised.
>>HARVEY: Well
they teach you that
stuff because they
want to control you.
>>REGINA: Well and
we're going to get
into the control
in just a second.
But what happens is
it has thrust millions
upon millions of people
that were under-- that
were in one Christian
faith or another into India
and across the borders of Tibet
to try to find the answers.
And tell me from
your perspective,
because you're so
well steeped in both
of these other religions, let's
just take those two for now.
And, of course, Rumi, which
we'll get to a little later.
>>HARVEY: Oh, God.
I'd love to.
Yeah.
>>REGINA: Let's talk about what
it is, in your own opinion,
that shines about this one
particular path of the Christ,
as opposed to Buddha and as
opposed to the Hindu teachings.
What is it that's--
>>HARVEY: Well I wouldn't ever
use the word "as opposed to,"
because I think-- I'll tell
you what I really think.
And you know how
reticent and restrained
I usually am about
expressing myself,
but you're drawing me out.
>>REGINA: Please say it
in your restrained manner.
>>HARVEY: I think
that humanity is
on a great evolutionary journey.
And that the destiny of
this evolutionary journey
is to embody the divine on Earth
in an embodied divine humanity.
And this is immensely difficult,
and immensely glorious,
and immensely challenging.
And I think that the time
for this radical embodiment
of the divine has come.
And that the sign of it is
the enormous, terrible crisis.
Evolution proceeds
by compulsive crises.
And I think if you
step back and look
at the evolutionary
history of the human race,
you see that we emerged
from the animals,
we created a gorgeous, shamanic,
matriarchal culture embedded
in the radiance of nature, which
was a very important foundation
and remains an essential
foundation for wisdom.
Then in the sixth and
seventh centuries BC,
there was what we
call the First Axial
Age in which a major
breakthrough, which gave us
access to a major new power and
understanding, was affected.
And it blazed in The
Upanishads in Hinduism.
It blazed softly in the
sublime life of the Buddha.
It blazed in Confucius'
brilliant understanding
of the relationship of
the spirit and society.
It burned in Lao Tzu.
It was a huge breakthrough
into the transcendent,
into the infinite
light that is actually
our deep, secret origin.
However, there was one problem.
And that was that
this breakthrough
was so gob-smacking,
so shattering,
that it actually set up a
kind of secret addiction.
Those traditions became addicted
to the transcendent, addicted
to the infinite light.
And they were so amazed by it
and so devastated and shattered
by its revelation that
they privileged it
as the unique goal, missing
the subtle interplay
between the light and
matter, between the father
and the mother, between this
great source and the creations
of the source, which
are just as holy.
>>REGINA: So it was
bypassing, essentially,
our material aspect?
>>HARVEY: Well it was.
And what happened was that it
created a subtle dissociation,
a subtle schizophrenia between
masculine and feminine,
between creator and creation,
between human and divine,
and between society
and the enlightened.
And this was very dangerous.
Then he came.
Jesus came, not to abandon the
past, but to sum up the pie.
In a way, he began
where the others ended.
He began with this tremendous,
shamanic background.
He was a shaman, Jesus.
The donkey, he rode on a donkey.
He had shamanic
powers of healing.
All of that.
He was also absolutely grounded
in the transcendent origin
of the Upanishads, and
Lao Tzu, and Buddha.
But he was also the son
of the divine mother,
the motherhood of God.
And he had the passion of
the mother for reality.
And he had the sense,
the deep understanding,
that the mother gives
of the utter sacredness
and holiness of everything.
Of this flower,
of our connection,
of our connection
as we're talking.
This interconnected, radiant
web of sacred reality.
And what Jesus brought in is
essential for the human race.
Not just for Christians.
He brought in a vision
of God as burning,
passionate, compassionate,
personal love,
as well as impersonal
grandeur and realization.
Again, a marriage of opposites.
And he brought in what his
own tradition had taught him
through the great prophets
and through the wisdom
tradition of the great
Jewish revelation.
He brought in the knowledge
that this love is in us
to help us co-create with
God the kingdom, queendom,
on Earth.
A wholly new way of being
and doing everything.
So this was an
evolutionary breakthrough.
And if you see the progress
of the religions like this,
it doesn't mean that you
don't revere the Upanishads.
I am lost in awe before
the grandeur of the Hindu
tradition.
The Buddhist tradition is
something that I've plunged in.
I co-wrote with Patrick
Gaffney, "The Tibetan Book
of Living and Dying."
I have a very deep reverence for
his holiness, the Dalai Lama.
I've studied very
deeply in Buddhism.
And I honor the ideal
of the bodhisattva.
But there's a difference
between enlightened compassion
and burning love.
And Jesus is the
avatar, or the apostle,
or the instrument of this
revelation of burning love.
And I feel that our
movement on the planet now,
our evolutionary movement,
could be so transformed
if people could connect
beyond religion, beyond dogma,
to this passionate, fiery,
burning love for reality.
Because that would connect
a spiritual realization
with sacred action
and make of us
all humble revolutionaries
of love in action.
And that's what I think
Jesus has created.
>>REGINA: I can't imagine anyone
saying it more beautifully
than what you've just said.
>>HARVEY: Thank you, darling.
So there's no opposition to
any of the other traditions.
It's a completion in a way.
It's look at one image of
it-- sorry to go on you,
but you've raised a
kind of radiant worm.
>>REGINA: No, please do.
>>HARVEY: It's as if what the
great Hindu, and Buddhist,
and Daoist revelations did
was to awaken the light
and to reveal the light in us.
But what Jesus was was a lens,
a lens through which the light
can become focused on real
problems in the real world.
On poverty, on injustice,
on the horrible treatment
of gay people.
>>REGINA: Which was
part of his activism.
Historically, it was
>>HARVEY: Yes.
He's the most radical person
that's ever been on the Earth.
He absolutely un-wrote
the patriarchy
before the patriarchy
really blazed into being.
He came at the moment
when the Romans
were going to take
over the world
and make the patriarchal way
of being the only way of being
and then risk the
psychosis, which
is now threatening the world.
And he came as a man, not
because men are superior,
but because men were
about to go crazy
with this obscene
vision of power.
And he showed the
exact opposite way.
He showed the way
through, the way out.
And the way out was through
surrender, and humility,
and love, and tenderness,
and a passion for justice.
And a real, radical respect
for all forms of life.
It could not be a
more important message
for the whole world
at this moment.
>>REGINA: Too bad
it didn't take.
>>HARVEY: It did take.
It didn't take in the
churches, because they all
got taken over by
the boy's club.
And the great catastrophe
was when the Roman Empire
made Christianity its
official religion.
And there were many
other catastrophes.
Then we have the farce of the
Vatican and all the rest of it.
But it took in some of
the extraordinary mystics.
And Christianity actually, the
Christian mystical tradition,
is as glorious as
any of the others.
And what I'd love to
say to all seekers
out there who may have
absolutely turned away
from Jesus because of
the horrible image of him
as a misogynistic,
homophobic tyrant claiming
total uniqueness--
all that nonsense
that we've been sold
by the boy's club who
want to control us through
that image-- get rid of that,
and listen to the
amazing message.
And plunge into the
great Christian mystics.
Because if you do,
you'll find that you
will find an extraordinary
range of understanding.
Look at Theresa of Avila, one of
the greatest mystics who's ever
been here, who has a
deeper understanding
of the interior
life than anybody.
Look at Radovich of
Antwerp, one of my craziest
and most magnificent
friends of the soul.
She was this burning, Rumi-like
poet of the twelfth century.
Mad for love of God.
Look at Matilda of Magdeburg,
the incredible woman who
understood that Jesus was a
mother as well as a father.
Look at Julian of Norwich,
look at Meister Eckhart,
look at Rickebrick.
Look, in our time, at people
like Howard Thurman, who
wrote that book that
Martin Luther King carried
into jail with him, "Jesus
and The Disinherited."
Look at Matthew Fox doing this
staggering, monumental work,
bringing in the whole
vision of the cosmic Christ,
the whole universe lit
up with the glory of God.
Look at the Celtic
mystics, who worshipped
Jesus in every flower,
in every rabbit,
and in the vision of the
whole creation as singing
the praises of God.
And when you do come into the
Christian mystical tradition
like this, you see that it
is just as powerful, just as
noble, just as
grand as any other.
And gifted, at its core, with
this particular understanding
of passionate love for
justice and compassion,
which is so important.
>>REGINA: And you can't go
there without addressing
the divinity in the
feminine, of course,
which is the other part of this.
And so what happened?
>>HARVEY: Mm.
That's a lovely one.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And why was mother Mary elevated
while Mary Magdalene was
cast aside?
>>HARVEY: Well let's look at
it-- let's start with Jesus.
I want to tell you
one of the greatest
experiences of my life.
I've been to Israel three times.
And I've been in the
places where he was.
And is.
And when, on my first
visit, I went to Tabgha,
which is where he
gave the Beatitudes.
And it's a rolling, gorgeous
meadow filled with wild flowers
by the sea of Galilee.
And I stood in this
field of wild flowers
which was saturated by
soft, spring sunlight.
And I gazed across
the glittering blue
of the sea of Galilee.
And saw the soft-breasted
hills around it.
And suddenly it burst upon me
that everything that he ever
championed, the Beatitudes--
"Blessed are the pure in heart,
for they shall see God.
Blessed are those who mourn,
for they shall be comforted"--
it's all Mother transmission.
He was as much a son of the
mother, a child of the mother,
as he was of the
transcendent father.
And when you see
that, when you really
know that Jesus was a
sacred androgen, someone
fusing at the
greatest and deepest
depths, the transcendent piece
of the Father with the burning,
compassionate passion of
all the truth of the Mother,
then you understand that
what he's bringing in
is the true sacred marriage.
And he's representing the
empowered, humble, loving life
that that gives birth to.
And then you look at
actually how he lived.
He didn't live as a guru.
He lived as a traveling
troubadour of God.
He always said, don't love me.
Don't idolize me.
It's your faith
that has healed you.
He got dressed up as a female
servant at the Last Supper
and washed their feet.
And said, don't project on me.
Stop it.
You must be me in action.
And look at the relationships
that he had with women.
It wasn't simply that he
had an enlightened mother.
And Mary is the divine
mother, the embodied mother.
They came together.
It's a mother,
son, father dance.
But he had a consort,
probably a tantric consort,
in Mary Magdalene.
Someone whom he
adored, and who adored
him, was present
at the crucifixion,
was the first person
to see him resurrected.
She was almost totally written
out of the later tradition
because the boy's club
wanted to control it
and couldn't face the full,
outrageous radicalism of Jesus'
overturning of all the
previous ways of being--
>>REGINA: Of his pure humanity.
Simple humanity.
>>HARVEY: His tenderness.
But his femininity.
Why do we love Jesus?
It's because he is-- of
course, he's grand, and strong,
and he does miracles.
And he's noble,
and he's powerful.
He has the full beauty of
the sacred masculine in him.
But he's also
unbelievably tender,
and shattered, and vulnerable.
And he's also outraged,
as a lioness is outraged,
as the black Madonna is outraged
by any kind of cruelty to life.
He has the mother
outrage at things.
So he brings both with
such enormous truth.
When you see that, when
you begin to comprehend it,
it changes your complete vision
of him and of the Revelation.
It's utterly insane that women
haven't been totally let in.
They were actually bishops
until the second century.
Women were bishops.
And then the boy's club took
over, and then they were--
>>REGINA: It's had
devastating consequences.
You were just
talking a moment ago.
You used the word "likely."
They were likely in a tantric
type of relationship, Jesus
and Mary Magdalene.
And let's talk about
that for a moment.
The genuine
constituents that have
to be present to have
a tantric relationship.
And I don't mean
the stuff that's
being sold in the
new age community.
>>HARVEY: Oh, God.
That's not tantra.
That's souped-up pornography.
It has nothing to
do with tantra.
>>REGINA: It is.
And so let's talk
about what it takes
to have a genuine
tantric connection.
>>HARVEY: There are three
things that it takes.
The first is that both
people must be high adepts.
They must have a deep,
deep, radical understanding
of their divine origin.
The second thing
is that they must
be in a relationship
of the profoundest
respect spiritually, mentally,
emotionally, and physically.
All four must come together.
And that that respect is
focused on worshipping the other
as the emanation of the divine.
Not just adoring
each other, and not
just lusting for each other,
but worshipping each other,
consciously, from
their own divine self,
as an emanation of the other.
And third, that they really make
a commitment, the people who
are taking on this
tremendous glory
of a tantric relationship,
to guard each other's shadow.
Because you cannot have an
authentic tantric relationship
with a lot of frightening
stuff coming up,
because so much is at stake
in a tantric relationship.
>>REGINA: What do you mean by
this guard each other's shadow?
>>HARVEY: Well what it
means is that if you
are pursuing a true
tantric relationship, which
has as its goal the
divinization of everything.
It's not just your mind that
is inflamed with new knowledge.
It's not just your heart
that opens to great bliss.
It's also that your body gets
transformed in subtle ways
by the constant irrigation,
by divine orgasmic ecstasy.
And that is-- it actually is a
true, inner, physical change.
But the divine
power that comes in
is so great that it awakens
immense resistance in you.
And you get exposed
to your jealousy,
to your possessiveness,
to your nastiness,
to your childhood wounds,
to your body hatred,
to your body loathing,
to all the messages
that you've ever
given them by anybody
about your insufficiency.
And those can drown you.
And they can make you
behave in weird ways.
Not me, of course,
but other people.
>>REGINA: Of course.
>>HARVEY: If you believe
that, you believe anything.
They can make you behave in
weird and destructive ways.
And if you're having a
tantric relationship,
you have to have an
awe-inspiring and humble sense
of what this process
means for both of you.
And truly, truly help the
other person with their shadow,
instead of damning them,
but also protect them in it,
so that you don't do
things or say things
that activate that
shadow, so that they
have more of a chance of
bringing all of themselves
into the glorious, golden
glow of the relationship.
>>REGINA: So from what
is evidenced around us,
in all of humanity, the
incredible damage that
has been incurred over the
last thousands of years.
But also even over
the last 50 years,
just by way of media alone.
And self image, and expectation.
>>HARVEY: The church is telling
us that the body is dirty.
And women are dirty
because they are
the purveyors of original sin.
All this has created a
horrible schizophrenia.
>>REGINA: So how can
people ever really begin
connecting on that level?
Well, this brings us
to Rumi, actually.
>>HARVEY: No.
Let's talk about Jesus
a little bit longer,
because I think that
if you see Jesus
as this great, sacred,
androgynous, sublimely
masculine, sublimely
feminine being, who
was a man, what you can see, if
you look at his relationships,
is that he models for us
two very important kinds
of relationships.
He models the male
female relationship
with Mary Magdalene.
And the rapture,
and the tenderness,
and the beauty of what
we can gather from it.
And we have the
gospel of Mary, which
shows that she was the one he
gave his highest teachings to.
Shows him kissing her.
And all the other disciples
freak out, naturally,
because they're jealous.
>>REGINA: Of course,
most people have not
heard of the gospel of Mary.
>>HARVEY: Well it is something
that everybody should read,
because it really
shows how primal she
was to his whole
mission and suggested
they had a very
intimate relationship.
He was a rabbi, after all.
I don't think he would
have kissed anybody
on the mouth that he wasn't
actually, maybe married to.
We'll never know.
>>REGINA: And
there's some evidence
in Aramaic
interpretations that they
were married and
did have children.
>>HARVEY: The second
relationship-- and this
is actually in the
Gospels, and has always
been a theme that
haunts European art-- is
the relationship that he has
with his beloved disciple who
leans against his heart
at the Last Supper.
This is such a-- And
that beloved disciple,
traditionally, was the one
who wrote John's gospel.
John.
So he's modeling
the sublime tantra
of-- the sublime sexual
tantra with a woman.
He's also modeling the sublime
tantra of male friendship
at the highest level with a man.
Imagine.
Imagine if we had a world that
could respond to these two,
linked revelations.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
You know--
>>HARVEY: It would
be astonishing.
Everything would be
changed, wouldn't it?
>>REGINA: Yes.
Indeed.
And I have to say,
on a personal level,
I had perhaps the most
not just unexpected
but profound mystical
experience of my life
in the little cave
near the monastery
that John the
Baptist is said to go
into for his mystic journeys.
My seat, my rear end barely
touched the little stool
that's in that tiny
little cave, and things
started showing themselves
that were unbelievable.
The power was unbelievable.
>>HARVEY: If you go to that
place, if you go to the place
where the tomb was,
if you go to the place
where he was born in Bethlehem,
that incredible place where
there's just a black
star-- If you go,
many extraordinary things will
happen to you if you are open.
The power of his presence.
And this evolutionary power has
to come back into humanity now.
>>REGINA: Well I mean
it's alive and well,
if you can manage to--
>>HARVEY: Oh, God, yes.
>>REGINA: I mean you
could just-- all you
have to do is have the intention
even of tapping into it.
You don't have to
travel to Jerusalem.
>>HARVEY: And the
belief that you can.
And the belief that you can
have an intimate, personal
relationship with someone
who has become one
with the entire universe,
but who is also your brother
beloved.
You know?
>>REGINA: So when we
look at these teachings,
when we look at
what you just talked
about about this sacred dance
between the masculine and
feminine.
I'm asking you this--
>>HARVEY: And the masculine
and the masculine.
>>REGINA: And the masculine
>>HARVEY: Because
in a way, I think
the whole homosexual movement
would be transformed.
I mean, gay men, if they
could model their relationship
on Jesus and John, wouldn't
that take homosexual liberation
to a wholly new level
of transcendent love?
And if two men who are straight
could model their friendship
on this sublime
exchange of the heart,
wouldn't that
transfigure the way
in which men relate to
each other in the world?
>>REGINA: Well it
certainly would,
and as they've had the
dominant, primary influence
on the way things have
played out in every respect--
militarily,
politically, et cetera--
how would you view that
kind of transformation
and its effect on the world?
>>HARVEY: Well you
mentioned military.
You know, I have
many marine friends.
I have a great friend who's
in the special forces.
And actually, military
guys have that kind
of relationship with each other,
because they are truly prepared
to die for each other.
>>REGINA: This is true.
>>HARVEY: And their level
of love for each other.
If you see marines
together, you think
they're all having love affairs.
They're not.
They're straight
guys who are just
mad about each other and
truly surrender to each other,
because they've sweated
together, bled together.
The tragedy is that they have
to learn that in violence.
Why can't we have men who learn
it in friendship and reality?
And sports is a good way
for people to come to it,
but I want another level
of masculine transmission.
I'm hungry and waiting for
these-- and they're coming.
The younger generation of men
are really waking up to this.
But, of course, we're living in
a system which pits everybody
against everyone else, has
a completely fake dream,
has a totally
narcissistic spirituality.
And it's very hard to get out
of this competitive framework,
but you can.
And if you do, a whole
feast of love awaits you.
>>REGINA: Well now,
you lecture all over.
>>HARVEY: I never stop talking.
>>REGINA: You
never stop talking,
which I love about you.
And there are people that are
looking for very practical ways
to go about this transformation
in their own lives.
Which we have cellular
memory, lifetime
after lifetime after
lifetime, of these old edicts.
Of this repression and
so forth, which is--
and we talked about
this off camera--
creating an incredible lash
back, certainly among women.
A lot of women that I
know, and among men,
as the ethers seem to
be refining to the point
where everything can
begin bubbling closer
to the surface, tremendous
amounts of resentment
and anger--
>>HARVEY: Rage.
>>REGINA: --are
starting to surface.
Now let's look at that
part, because we can't just
go into love and light without
acknowledging the rage.
>>HARVEY: Oh, God, no.
I'm not a love
and light brigade.
You know me.
>>REGINA: I know, so
let's talk about it.
Most people are looking
for love and light.
But this is sitting right
there, ready to come up.
>>HARVEY: We're
never going to find
the true love and the
true light without going
through the shadow.
But what we have
to evolve-- Let's
take the male female
problem, and let's
try and look at it from the
Jesus perspective together.
It's obvious that patriarchy
has wounded, and betrayed,
and humiliated, and degraded
women at the deepest level.
Made them into
whores, or Madonnas,
or purveyors of
original sin, and made
them deeply self-loathing
of the very things
that women should be
so gloriously proud of.
Their bodies, the
power of creation
that is given to
a woman, the fact
that a woman is really a
representative, an ambassador,
a living vision of
the divine mother.
My God.
And the same thing
is being done to men,
because you can't
make an oppressor
class without secretly
oppressing the heart,
and soul, and body
of the oppressor.
So men are cut off from
the feminine they degrade.
And women are annihilated by
pain, and resentment, and rage
at everything that
they've suffered.
What's necessary now, I
think, is for men and women
to evolve a way of being
with each other in which
these deep-seated, cellular
agonies can be talked about,
can be opened up,
while not accusing
the other person of being
the representative of it.
>>REGINA: Right.
Exactly.
>>AUDIENCE: So many men--
straight guys that I love
and who are my buddies--
come up to me and say,
you have no idea.
I can't.
I am not personally
responsible for the last 2,500
years of patriarchy.
I'm trying very hard
to be a metro-sexual.
I'm trying to be kind.
I'm trying to be sensitive.
I've read Clarissa Pinkola
Estes and Betty Friedan.
>>REGINA: But
nothing is working.
>>HARVEY: Nothing
is working because I
am being held to account for
crimes I myself know are awful.
And I'm really
trying to transform.
And this is not working.
And the same with women.
I think that women
really need to be
able to voice their
outrage and their pain
without identifying with it,
because they are not just
their rage.
They are the divine mother.
And I think the
key is two things.
First, women to connect with
the divine motherhood of God.
And men to connect with
the divine masculine.
And to be empowered at
a sacred level by both.
Both need to be there.
And then, when
they come together,
to do practices, very
simple practices,
that can align the man and the
woman with their divine truth.
And then to speak like
you speak if you're
an Israeli or a Palestinian
in a hostage negotiation.
It's no good screaming.
You just have to speak calmly
and not make the other person
guilty, not shame or
blame the other person.
Help the other person.
Both men and women are in a
catastrophic, dissociated,
horrifically painful situation
in which both are cut off
from the best of each other.
Let's get real.
Let's get together.
Let's work out ways in
which we can share this.
>>REGINA: This takes incredible
maturity and courage.
And you're looking
on behalf of women.
What you'll often
see is that that pain
that's coming up closer
to the surface now,
that outrage, which is basically
standing up and saying,
no more.
OK?
>>HARVEY: And there's a
good thing about that.
>>REGINA: There is a
But at the same time,
because of an innate need
for a type of really
almost cellular security,
which is running throughout
our historical DNA,
this need for security,
there is a fear of the women
to speak up and share
that rage because they're
afraid they'll
lose what they have
by way of their
secure relationship.
And so they continue even now,
with it surfacing, stuffing it.
>>HARVEY: Well I think that
what you're talking about
is something that Jesus is
very, very brilliant on,
too, because Jesus shows us
that outrage is essential.
If you're not outraged,
you're not human.
But that outrage
is just not enough.
You have to be able to
transmute that outrage
into fierce compassion energy.
So what I would suggest to
women is, and very respectfully,
is that they come together
and empower each other
in that outrage.
Really voice it with each other.
Get it out.
And then work with
divine practices
so that that outrage becomes
that laser calm, clear vision.
Then men will be deeply
humiliated by the outrage.
And they will hear the love.
That doesn't mean that
women have to in any way
mitigate what they know,
or soften what they say,
or in any way not get
their deep point across.
>>REGINA: But dumping
it on your man
is not working well right now.
>>HARVEY: No.
And you can't be heard.
If I scream at you,
even if I'm screaming
absolutely true things,
you're going to resist it.
That's just how human
beings are built.
I know very wonderful
women who are outraged,
who do know this
about the patriarchy,
but who love their men enough
to be able to work on it
and to be able to say what
they need to say in a way
that men can hear.
And there's a very simple rule,
which my women friends tell me,
which is first tell the guy how
much you really care about him.
Tell him how much
you appreciate him.
>>REGINA: Set the scene
softly and gently.
Yes.
>>HARVEY: And then be very
clear, and very lucid,
and very, very to the point
about what needs to be changed.
But you'll never get anybody to
change anything, especially not
a man, if you humiliate him and
make him feel like a killer.
He'll just say, damn it.
I'm going to just be the
person that she thinks I am,
because she's not
giving me the juice.
She's not giving me what
I need from a woman.
I need her tenderness.
And I need her acceptance.
And then I'll change
anything for her.
And the same for the-- does
that make any sense to you?
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
No.
It makes perfect sense.
>>HARVEY: And the
same for the man.
Love your woman enough that
when she drives you nuts,
don't shout at her.
Don't batter her
emotionally, God
knows, and certainly
not physically.
Take it.
And then work on it.
And then offer her
your love for her.
And then say, I would
be-- maybe I'm wrong,
but this is what I'm feeling.
Please let me share with
you how, when you do that,
it makes me feel.
And I know you don't
want me to feel that.
So let's find another
way of doing this.
>>REGINA: And we're
a brave generation.
This is the bridge generation
that has chosen to break away.
And also, it's
not-- we've chosen
to incarnate at this time.
And the frequencies,
the cosmic frequencies
are supporting this
transformation.
>>HARVEY: We're
choosing to marry
the masculine and the feminine.
Everyone is on that journey.
That Jesus is coming
back to us, the Jesus
of the sacred
marriage, to help us
fuse the masculine and feminine,
heaven and Earth, matter
and spirit.
And get on with the
business of transforming
the planet before
we all explode.
>>REGINA: Yes.
Now we're going to go on from
there to one of the bridges.
And that can be the work
of Rumi and the concepts
that Rumi was trying
to-- well the divinity
that he was trying to
relate to humanity.
And you've been
studying Rumi for, what?
40 years.
This is your passion.
>>HARVEY: Although I'm only 42.
Yes.
>>REGINA: Gosh,
you started early.
But then you did start reading
very young, I've heard.
>>HARVEY: No.
I'm 60.
Yes.
>>REGINA: So with
Rumi, what is the piece
of Rumi in terms of the divinity
and purity of love from-- just
from within between ourselves
and the divine-- not even
expressing yet with
another human being--
that you cherish so much
and can share with us?
And the Christ concepts
that he also embraced.
>>HARVEY: Yes.
It all goes together, actually.
This is such a
momentous discovery
that's really been made
in the last 30 years.
And it goes like this.
Rumi was, of course,
Islamic and Muslim.
But many people
don't know that Jesus
plays an immense
role in the Quran.
He is celebrated as a
great, great prophet.
And also, he's given the role
of bringing in the rule of God
at the end of time.
It isn't prophet
Muhammad who comes back.
It's Jesus.
Also, in the Sufi
mystical tradition,
the Islamic mystical
tradition, Jesus
appears to the mystic at
a time when that mystic
has achieved a level
of divine love.
And this is known.
He appeared to Iba Nairobi, the
great mystical philosopher that
influenced Rumi,
and he undoubtedly
appeared to Rumi himself.
Because Jesus goes
beyond religion.
Jesus is the force of
divine love in action.
And when you are taken
by your realization
to the place in which that is
beginning to be alive in you,
Jesus will appear to
you to guide you deeper
into it, whether you're Hindu,
or Buddhist, or Islamic.
This is something that the
mystics of the lovers of God
know.
The most important thing
that I could say about Rumi
is that Rumi lived
the Jesus life.
He was crucified
and resurrected.
He was crucified by
the agony of his love
for Shams, his great teacher.
Because Shams was killed.
And he went mad.
And after three
years, he realized
that Shams was
living inside him.
And he was resurrected
as a divine human
by this shattering,
amazing experience.
So he lived the
archetypal life that Jesus
came to give us, the
evolutionary Christ path.
And there are 82 poems that he
devoted to Jesus in his work.
And I'm going to say something
which is pretty wild,
but actually part of a
secret tradition, which
I think it's time now
to reveal to the planet.
It goes like this.
We are living at the time of the
great birth of divine humanity.
That birth is the birth of
an embodied, divine humanity
inspired by the fire
of love, impassioned
for justice and
compassion on every level.
It's a transformation
on every level.
The Second Coming that
people talk about,
and the fundamentalists make
into the return of a Star Wars
avatar is not the second
coming of Jesus, the person.
It's the rising of the golden
yeast of passionate love
consciousness in millions
and millions of human beings,
as a response to this
appalling evolutionary crisis
that we've created
out of our own lunacy.
And this passionate
love consciousness,
passionate for compassion,
passionate for harmony,
passionate for balance,
passionate for justice,
is rising now like
a golden yeast
in millions of human beings of
all kinds all over the world.
And as you will notice, the
greatest poet in the world now,
the poet who is most read in the
world, the poet that Buddhists
love, that Hindus love,
that Christians love,
that Muslims love,
is Jalal ad-Din Rumi.
So what Rumi's poetry is
doing, this incredible power
that's coming through
this incredible poet,
is softening up the
whole human race
for the rising of this
divine love consciousness.
They come together.
Jesus did his enormous work
of laying down the path.
Rumi came 13 centuries later to
give us this universal Christ
vision, whatever you call it.
Doesn't matter what you call it.
Universal intense vision
of love in action in poetry
that the whole world
could be intoxicated by.
And now the time has come for
the return of the real Jesus,
and the return of the
real Rumi, and the return
of all the lovers of God
that say, get going now.
Put love into action.
>>REGINA: That is
astoundingly put, too.
>>HARVEY: You see, at
the end of his life,
Rumi wrote this quatrain.
And it was about his
relationship with Shams.
And this quatrain is the key.
He said-- he was talking
about his beloved, beloved
relationship with
his supreme teacher.
He said, "Those tender words we
said to one another have been
stored in the secret
heart of heaven.
And one day, like the rain,
they will fall and spread
and the whole world will
grow green with our love."
And the love that Shams and
Rumi birthed on the Earth
is the embodied, divine,
passionate, tender love
of the Christ consciousness.
This burning relationship.
And it's that
burning relationship
that's the key to the
evolutionary transformation
of humanity.
The burning relationship
between human beings,
the burning relationship between
human beings and animals,
us and the glory of creation,
the burning relationship
between us and the whole,
blazing glory of the universe.
This is what will give us
the chutzpah, and the joy,
and the energy to get out
of our funk of paralysis,
and depression, and cynicism,
and irony, and boredom,
and start transforming
the world in and for God.
>>REGINA: And when I read Rumi,
what comes to me on, again,
almost a cellular
level, is that this
is above anything else
about our connection
to simply the
divine, higher aspect
of our own being, our own soul.
Which is already
connected with all.
>>HARVEY: Well the beauty of
what he's trying to convey
is, first of all,
he's trying to arouse
a wild love for the beloved.
And then, as that
love progresses,
you realize something that
blows your brains out,
which is that you are the
beloved of the beloved.
And that the beloved is
living in you, as you.
And then the seeker and the
sought become one mystery.
>>REGINA: And then, one
might contemplate tantra
with another human
being, from that place.
>>HARVEY: Yes.
Because what you're
having a great love affair
with is a different aspect
of your own divine self,
to be cherished, and
respected, and nourished,
and held in the most infinite,
infinite, tender compassion.
This is the real tantra.
The rubbish that they're selling
in the great, terrible, smelly
bazaar of the new
age is rubbish.
It has nothing to
do with tantra.
It has to do with a kind of
degraded form of athletics.
>>REGINA: It keeps being shut
down by local police anyway.
>>HARVEY: And I'm
not only saying this
because I can't fling leg
over the top of my shoulder.
It's not that.
It's that without this
vision, all of that
just becomes the higher
pornography, doesn't it?
>>REGINA: Yes.
OK.
So now you have been saying
these sorts of things publicly
and in churches, I suppose.
And now another-- we opened the
conversation talking about what
happened when you
and Matthew Fox
had your gathering in Oakland.
Now, you were also in
Charlotte recently.
And tell us a little bit
about what happened that day?
To show how people
are opening to this.
>>HARVEY: Well what
happened was that I'd
given-- I have a
sacred leadership
school with a magnificent
man called Chris Sade, who's
doing momentous work.
He's really being
a champion of what
he calls second
wave spirituality.
First, the new age,
which did good things,
but became hopelessly
narcissistic.
Now the second wave,
which has to be engaged
spirituality, otherwise we
are truly up you know where.
And he's fabulous.
And I gave a talk on
Jesus, this Jesus,
to a Unity Church in Charlotte.
And I just, I must say I was
like an old cabaret singer who
flung away-- I just went for it.
Because it's much too late not
to go for it at this moment.
And the reaction was fantastic.
People are hungry to be allowed
an intimate relationship
with this incredible
being and the revelation.
And they just all came
up afterwards and said,
thank god you're saying it,
because we've always felt it.
We've always intuited it,
but people weren't telling us
that this was the
real relationship.
Now we have you-- you've
been mad enough to show it.
So now we can go mad with
love and do the same thing.
>>REGINA: What did the pastor?
Is it called a pastor?
A minister?
>>HARVEY: She's a priest.
>>REGINA: What did she say?
>>HARVEY: She's an old
and great friend of mine,
and she sort of mopped her brow.
And she said, my god,
this is the real thing.
And we're going to be
establishing a new church.
We're going to call it the
Church of the Living Christ.
And I'm not going to
be the head of it,
because there's not
going to be any head.
But I'm going to
be a kind of-- I'm
going to be the gay godfather
of the new Church of the Living
Christ.
Yes.
>>REGINA: But they're
changing their Unity Church?
Yes.
There you go.
>>HARVEY: It's about time we
had a few gay Christs around,
right?
>>REGINA: Yes.
It's about time.
>>AUDIENCE: Women Christs,
gay Christs, straight Christs.
That's what's needed.
>>REGINA: It's all
the same spirit.
>>HARVEY: It is.
With just different roles.
And different functions.
>>REGINA: Different faces.
And I would like to ask you.
We only have a couple
of minutes left.
And I'd like to ask
you for all the people
that are now hungry for more
of this information and work,
can you tell us-- you
have so many books.
"Son of Man, The
Mystical Path to Christ."
Right here.
>>HARVEY: This is
truly the book I
love the most that
I've ever written.
It took 20 years to write it.
And many, many breakdowns
and breakthroughs.
And everything that I've ever
really experienced about him
is in this book.
And it has the inspiration of my
great teacher, Bede Griffiths,
running through it.
And there are tape
sets that I did
for Sounds True called
"Radiant Heart."
And "Son of Man."
And in "Radiant Heart,"
what I'm trying to do
is to help Christians get to
the buried mystical practices
of Christianity that
can help them have
this flaming, passionate,
intimate relationship.
>>REGINA: And they're
present in this book?
>>HARVEY: They're present in
that book and in that tape set.
So the revolution has been under
preparation for quite a while.
But now, it's time.
>>REGINA: It is indeed.
And, I mean, I'm always
left, as you say,
gob-smacked, in
British terminology.
>>HARVEY: I love gob-smacked.
>>REGINA: I love
gob-smacked, too.
But I'm also left
breathless at your words.
I mean, you have the
ability, I don't know who
or what you've been
from times past,
but you have the
ability to reach people
on a very, very deep level.
And I want to thank you so much
again for being here with us.
>>HARVEY: Thank you
very, very much.
Thank you for being touched.
>>REGINA: If you're
inspired by Andrew's words,
you can then delve
deeper through one
of his many books
available on Amazon
and other major booksellers.
Andrew also supports the
works of other great authors,
such as Chris Sade,
and Cynthia Bourgeault,
which we mentioned earlier.
And you can do some of that
for further, quality research.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.
[MUSIC PLAYING]